---
title: "My Testimony"
date: "2024-02-04"
slug: "more-holiness-give-me/my-testimony"
tags: ["church"]
---

As you read through all of my blog, I hope it becomes apparent where I stand on
everything. However, just in case, I want to make it crystal clear where I stand
and what I believe.

I believe that the Book of Mormon is the word of God. By "word of God," I mean
that I believe it teaches true and correct principles. By following its
teachings, we draw closer to God, just as we would by following the words of God
given to us through any prophet, whether ancient or modern. I believe the Book
of Mormon is a translation of an actual ancient record. I believe that Nephi,
Mormon, Moroni, and all the people in between were real individuals, and the
Book of Mormon is a genuine history of those people. I believe that Joseph Smith
was directed to the plates by Moroni and translated them through the gift and
power of God. The Book of Mormon came forth just as Joseph Smith said it did.

I believe that the Church is led by honest men who are trying their best to live
honorable lives. It is their intention to guide the members of the Church to
live lives in harmony with the teachings of Christ. I believe they **know** that
the Church is true. They are sincere followers of Christ and special witnesses
of His divinity and reality. They are the only ones holding all the keys to
guide and direct the Church. It would be foolish for anyone to take their
counsel lightly, even if it is based only on personal experience and opinion,
and especially if it comes through them in their roles as prophets, seers, and
revelators.

I believe that Joseph Smith was a prophet called of God, and I believe that
Brigham Young is his authorized successor. I believe that the line of priesthood
keys flows unbroken from them to President Nelson.

Most importantly, I believe in Jesus Christ. The above beliefs are important
because they help us understand Jesus Christ and His divine role in helping us
draw closer to God. I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, that he
lived, died, and was resurrected. I testify of these things in His Holy Name,
Amen.
