---
title: "A Sinner's Practical Guide to Christ's Atonement"
date: "2024-10-09"
slug: "talks/a-sinners-practical-guide-to-christs-atonement"
related: []
tags: ["Church", "Talks"]
color: green
---

The following is a talk that I prepared for Sacrament meeting on Feb 25, 2024

# A Sinner's Practical Guide to Christ's Atonement

I struggled a bit with this topic because there’s so much to say about the
atonement. It's not only the most important aspect of our faith but of
everything. At the same time, it’s one of the most incomprehensible concepts,
considering that Christ accomplished an impossibly vast amount of atoning in
such a short period of time. And if we set aside for a moment the infinite scope
of the Atonement—applying to all sins, temptations, and trials of every person,
everywhere, from the beginning to the end of time—just thinking about how it
applies to a single person is overwhelming. I can hardly fathom what that looks
like, let alone how it extends to all of humanity.

So, when I was asked to speak on just "the atonement," I was left with all of
that—where do I even begin?

Everything I found was talking about how big and incredible the atonement is
and all of the big and incredible reasons why we need it.

As I was researching it, I realized that in the past I often got scared away
from the difficult or impossible to understand infinite nature of the atonement
and I never really took the time to figure out what the atonement was or what
applying the atonement looked like. So this time, I decided to try and take a
step back and look at the atonement from a practical standpoint. Even though the
inner workings of the atonement are incomprehensibly complex and infinite and we
may never understand it, at least not in this life, surely if we are supposed to
use in out daily lives we ought to be able to understand what "applying it"
looks like, right?

So what follows is what I found as I was trying to better understand the
everyday use of the atonement, and I am calling it _A Sinner's Practical Guide to
Christ's Atonement_.

## You're probably already using it

The first thing I had to understand about the atonement from a practical stand
point is that I was already using it without realizing I was using it.

David Foster Wallace shared a parable one time

"There are these two young fish swimming along and they happen to meet an older
fish swimming the other way, who nods at them and says “Morning, boys. How’s the
water?” And the two young fish swim on for a bit, and then eventually one of
them looks over at the other and goes “What the [heck] is water?”
[^this-is-water]

When he told the story he was trying to encourage a group of graduating students
to not get so caught up in close mindedness, blind certainty, and over
zealousness for their own thoughts that they miss the small every day moments
all around us [^TRUTH], but I want to put a bit of a different spin on it. I
think there are some things in our life that are just so fundamental to how we
operate that are hard to understand just because we surrounded by it every day.
To not have it would be unfathomable. Yet since it's always surrounding us we
sometimes take it for granted. I propose that the atonement is one such thing.
Without it we would be like fish out of water, but like the fish in the story
maybe we aren't fully aware of just how everywhere it is.

[^this-is-water]: [This is Water](https://fs.blog/david-foster-wallace-this-is-water/)
[^TRUTH]:
    Which I bring up only so that you know that I am going to willfully miss
    interpret the story for my own purposes. Which is fine because he even
    admitted in the talk that different people will interpret the same thing
    differently based on their perspective. So even though DFW was concerned
    about "the capital-T Truth [which] is about life BEFORE death". And since
    this is a practical guide I also feel like it ought to focus on the life
    before death, however I would argue that capital-T Truth also has much to do
    with life AFTER death and it's only with that perspective that we can
    maximize our life before it.

I've found in my efforts to understand Christ's atonement I often reflect on
"How would things be like without the atonement" and what I have found is that
the atonement is so critical to the plan of salvation that it becomes fairly
hard to imagine a world without it.

The Come Follow Me reading for this week was Jacob's great sermon on the
atonement of Jesus Christ. In it he teaches about the effects of the fall of
Adam and Eve, "as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of
the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection, and the
resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the fall; and the fall came
by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen they were cut off from
the presence of the Lord."[^2nephi]

[^2nephi]: 2 Nephi 9:6

The fall of Adam introduced two things, spiritual and temporal death. Because of
those things we will die and be separated from God forever. Which is hard for me
to appreciate because I have been raised knowing that is not the case; we will
be resurrected and we will be brought back into the presence of God. But only
because of the atonement. Without the atonement we would be spiritually and
physically dead forever. But wait, I thought that the second article of faith
said "We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for
Adam’s transgression."[^second-article-of-faith] Being spiritually and
physically dead forever sure sounds like we are being punished for Adam's
transgression. But I think the reason we can believe that men will be punished
for their own sins is because "we [also] believe that through the atonement of
Christ, all mankind may be saved"[^third-article-of-faith] So without the
atonement we don't get the second article of faith. We get nothing! No
guarantees for anything, no life after death, no recovery from our sins or the
consequences of the transgression of our first father, no water to swim in.

[^second-article-of-faith]: Second Article of Faith
[^third-article-of-faith]: Third Article of Faith

So because of the atonement a lot of things are set up for us without us having
to do anything.

We will all be resurrected, we will all be brought back to God's presence, just
by virtue of us being on the earth. Because Christ effected the atonement he has
enough Grace to make that happen for us no matter what. It's the water we are
swimming in every day even if we haven't heard of Jesus Christ. Because of the
atonement, we get repentance; we aren't lost forever because of our sins. We can
repent and become better, even until we, in the next life, fulfill Christ's
commandment to "be ye therefore perfect even as your father in heaven is
perfect"[^sermon-on-the-mount] And most of us are doing that everyday, and so we
are all taking advantage of the atonement every day. As we learn the gospel we
can learn to more effectively take advantage of the atonement, but regardless of
what we do in this life we are everyday swimming though the waters of the
atonement.

[^sermon-on-the-mount]: Matthew 5:48

## Practical Guide

### What is the atonement?

Okay so now that we understand why it's so hard to understand, let's try and
understand it. I'm not trying to get a full in depth understanding, just enough
so that I can do something with it. I want to know what the bear minimum
understanding of the atonement so I can start applying it and it doesn't feel so
amorphous.

The entry for the atonement of Jesus Christ in _True to the Faith_ sums it up
pretty well:

> Jesus’s atoning sacrifice took place in the Garden of Gethsemane and on the
> cross at Calvary. In Gethsemane He submitted to the will of the Father and began
> to take upon Himself the sins of all people. He has revealed some of what He
> experienced as He paid the price for our sins.
>
> “I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they
> would repent; But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; Which
> suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of
> pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would
> that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink— Nevertheless, glory be to the
> Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men”
> (D&C 19:16–19; see also Luke 22:44; Mosiah 3:7).
>
> The Savior continued to suffer for our sins when He allowed Himself to be
> crucified—“lifted up upon the cross and slain for the sins of the world” (1
> Nephi 11:33).
>
> On the cross, He allowed Himself to die. His body was then laid in a tomb until
> He was resurrected and became “the firstfruits of them that slept” (1
> Corinthians 15:20). Through His death and Resurrection, He overcame physical
> death for us all.

So for the purpose of this practical guide, let's not worry about it being
infinite and incomprehensible, let's not worry about the deep magic, or why it
was only Christ that could do it or how it answers the problems of the fall etc
etc etc. Simply put:

Jesus Christ atonement is everything that happened from when He started praying
in the Garden of Gethsemane until he was resurrected on the third day. It
includes his suffering for our sins and his dying and resurrecting. In this one
great act he made it possible for us to be resurrected and for us to be reunited
with God.

### What is the atonement meant to do?

With a simple understanding of the actual event of the atonement. What is it
meant to accomplish? As we saw earlier the purpose of the atonement is to
overcome the effects of the fall. Because of the fall we will suffer both
physical and spiritual death. Overcoming physical death will happen later, and
it will happen regardless of what we do, so as we are looking at how to use the
atonement let's focus on spiritual death (ie sin). So for the purposes of this
practical guide the atonement is meant to help us overcome sin and draw closer
to God. How can we use the atonement to do that?

### What does it mean to use the atonement?

Getting into the debate of salvation by grace or salvation by works is beyond
the scope of the guide. Theologically I don't fully understand it. What I do
understand is that we cannot be saved without Christ but also Christ has some
expectations for us.

Bruce R McConkie put it simply "the atonement is the gospel"[^Mormon-Doctrine].
It's the good news that Christ has overcome the effects of the fall so that we
don't have suffer from them forever. The Gospel is the atonement in action, and
I believe it's the principle way we can use the atonement in our everyday life.

[^Mormon-Doctrine]:
    McConkie, Bruce R. Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., "Atonement of
    Christ," p. 60. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966.

After his resurrection Jesus Christ came to Nephites to teach them His Gospel.
He said:

"Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have
given unto you—that I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because
my Father sent me. And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the
cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all
men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted
up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they
be good or whether they be evil— And for this cause have I been lifted up;
therefore, according to the power of the Father I will draw all men unto me,
that they may be judged according to their works. And it shall come to pass,
that whoso repenteth and is baptized in my name shall be filled; and if he
endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that
day when I shall stand to judge the world. And he that endureth not unto the
end, the same is he that is also hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence
they can no more return, because of the justice of the Father."[^3-nephi]

[^3-nephi]: 3 Nephi 27:13-17

Any time we, have faith, repent, make and keep covenants, use the gift of the
Holy Ghost to receive personal revelation and all other aspects of that divine
gift, we are using the atonement, and inviting Christ to have a place in our
lives so he can lead us back into the presence of God. [^grace-vs-works]

[^grace-vs-works]:
    I understand that at this point we are dangerously close to opening up the
    "Saved by Grace or Saved by Works" debate which I don't want to get into so
    I'm going to stick with what Christ said about his Gospel.

When Joseph Smith said that "The fundamental principles of our religion is the
testimony of the apostles and prophets concerning Jesus Christ, 'that he died,
was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended up into heaven;' and all
other things are only appendages to these, which pertain to our
religion."[^elders-journal] Not only does he mean that nothing in our religion
is more important that the atonement, but that all things that are part of our
religion are only possible because of the atonement, they only have effect
because of the atonement, the naturally flow from the atonement, they have
meaning and purpose only because of the atonement. Without the atonement the
gospel is missing it's driving force and is ultimately ineffectual.

[^elders-journal]: [Elder's Journal - July 1838](https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/elders-journal-july-1838/12)

#### How do we use the atonement?

-   Practical applications
    -   Exercise your faith
    -   Repent daily
    -   Get Baptized and receive the gift of the holy Ghost
        -   If you have already done that, renew that covenant as many Sundays as you possibly can by partaking of the sacrament, and use the gift of the Holy Ghost daily in your life.
    -   Keep doing that until you die.

#### Atonement everywhere

It was as I was studying for this talk that I began to realize just how
everywhere the atonement was. It really is like the air we breath or the water
the fish swim through.

Recently, I've been studying Freemasonry quite a bit, and though I'm not
entirely sure why, it's something that has fascinated me for a long time.
Perhaps it's the intriguing connections with early church history, or maybe I
just watched National Treasure too many times as a kid. One of the things I've
come to appreciate through this study is the fresh perspective it has given me
on our own religion. Some people are quick to point out the similarities between
their ceremonies and ours[^freemasonry], but, when you look deeper, there are
some key differences that I've found enlightening. For example, Freemasonry
focuses primarily on helping men become better in this life. It doesn't offer
salvation; instead, it encourages individuals to seek that from their own faith.
In contrast, our church not only provides knowledge of how Christ offers
salvation, but also what He requires of us. While our temple ceremonies focus
heavily on Adam and Eve and becoming like Christ, Masonic ceremonies center on the
building of King Solomon's temple. In fact, King Solomon's temple is a dominant
theme in everything they do—they love King Solomon's temple.

[^freemasonry]:
    Which I won't delve into here, but if you are interested let me know,
    because I love talking about Freemasonry and will probably be writing more
    about it

As I reflected on this, I realized that we have a similar reverence in our
church, but ours is centered on Christ and His Atonement. Just as Masonic
ceremonies symbolize various aspects of the building of the King Solomon's
Temple, our ordinances represent various aspects of the atonement. In baptism,
we symbolically die and are reborn in the Spirit when we receive the gift of the
Holy Ghost. In the endowment ceremony, we learn about the Fall and how Jesus
Christ helps us overcome it. Each week, through the sacrament, we remember one
of the most important parts of the atonement. When we take the bread, we
remember His body and that He died for us. When we drink the water, we remember
that He "suffer[ed] temptations, and pain of body, hunger, thirst, and fatigue,
even more than man can suffer, except it be unto death; for behold, blood cometh
from every pore, so great...[was] his anguish for the wickedness and the
abominations of his people" [^mosiah]. We show our faith in Christ by promising
to always remember Him, repenting of our sins, and reaffirming our commitment to
keep His commandments. In return, He promises that we will always have His
Spirit to be with us. The sacrament is truly a miniature version of the gospel
of Christ.

[^mosiah]: Mosiah 3:7

"Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have
given unto you—that I came into the world to do the will of my Father... And my
Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross... And it shall come to
pass, that whoso repenteth and is baptized in my name shall be filled; and if he
endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that
day when I shall stand to judge the world."[^3nephi]

[^3nephi]: 3 Nephi 27:13-16

## Ultimate Summary

Joseph Smith wrote the ultimate practical guide to the atonement in the articles
of faith

Because of the atonement, we believe that men will be punished for their own
sins and not for Adam's transgression. We believe that through the atonement of
Christ all man kind may be saved, by obedience to the law and ordinances or the
gospel, and we believe that the first principals and ordinances of that gospel
are first faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, second repentance, third baptism for
emersion for the remission of sins, forth laying on of hands for the gift of the
holy ghost.

I know that Christ loves us and that as we use the atonement every day we will
draw closer to Him. Even though I don't understand how it all works I know that
it does work, and I believe that through Christ's atonement we can all be saved.

In the name of Jesus Christ, amen.
