---
title: "Book of Mormon Translation Part II"
date: "2023-08-30"
slug: "the-lds-gospel-topics-series/book-of-mormon-translation-part-ii"
related: []
tags:
    [
        "Church",
        "Apologetics",
        "Book of Mormon",
        "Gospel Topics Essays",
        "Church History",
        "Book Review",
    ]
---

# Gospel Topics Essay: Book of Mormon Translation

This is part 2 of my [perspective of the topic of the Book of Mormon translation](https://www.bendemann.com/2023/07/book-of-mormon-translation.html):
part of my [Response to The LDS Gospel Topics Essays: A Scholarly Engagement](https://www.bendemann.com/2023/06/response-to-lds-gospel-topics-essays.html)

## Objective

My purpose in reviewing the Gospel Topics Essays:

I want to look over them to see what (if anything) is different from what I was
taught growing up in the church. If anything is different I want to explore why
it might be different. Finally I want to address if these differences might
constitute church leaders hiding the truth from the membership, and if so if
there might have been nefarious motives for doing so. I guess I would also
address whether or not those nefarious motives (if any) would constitute reason
for doubting the divinity of the restoration of the church.

Spoiler alert, in the case of presenting the narrative of the how the Book of
Mormon was translated, I find it highly improbable that any nefarious or
questionable motives were present at all in the past. There may be unanswered
questions, but I intend to show that it is reasonable for a person to believe
that the Seer Stone narrative came forth, not as the church started loosing
control of the narrative, but rather as a paradigm shift took place in the
methodology of church history that lent more credence to accounts that
previously were overlooked or disregarded[^disregarded].

[^disregarded]:
    Whether or not this paradigm shift was the historically accurate
    move is the principal source of the debate. Depending on where you land on the
    debate will affect if you see the move as enlightening or as a regression.

In fact, I believe that, if anyone was responsible for misrepresenting how the
Book of Mormon was translated, it is not the modern church and their alleged
hiding of facts, rather I find the historical data would pin the source of the
confusion (if any) on Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery[^why-oliver]
[^opportunity]. With that being said I also think they have the least
motive[^motive] for doing so. And the only way you can read misguidance or lack
of transparency on the accounts from Joseph and Oliver is if the
stone-in-the-hat (SITH) narrative is accurate[^if-the-church-is-false]. If the
SITH narrative is inaccurate then the only confusion comes from critics of the
church trying to cast an accusatory fog on the restoration and unfortunately
current mainstream historians are caught up in that fog and regardless of how
well intentioned, they are mistaken and Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and modern
church leaders were all telling the truth. Current church leaders would then be
mistaken for believing the mainstream historians, which I find unfortunate but
far from nefarious and even further from confirming the inauthenticity of the
church.

[^why-oliver]:
    I throw Oliver Cowdery in here, and not Emma Smith or Martin
    Harris because not only was Oliver a scribe, but because, according to D&C 8 and
    9, Oliver was an attempted translator, so hat or not; screen or not; or Nephite
    Interpreters or Seer Stone or not, Oliver had first hand experience with
    whatever Joseph Smith was experiencing. At least the physical parts of it. It
    appears that he was not successful in actually translating anything, but he,
    because of this attempt, became the only other undeniable first hand eye witness
    to the tools of the translation even if he never became a first hand witness of
    the full mechanics of the translation. Everyone else may not have been first
    hand witnesses depending on the method used to conceal the Urim and Thummim from
    the scribes. If there was a curtain or screen separating the scribes from Joseph
    then their accounts are necessarily hearsay; they wouldn't not have seen
    anything. If whatever the translation instrument was was at the bottom of a hat
    the whole time, then, even then, they still might not be first hand eye
    witnesses.

[^opportunity]:
    They are the ones that failed to leave any indication that they
    used the Seer Stone in the Book of Mormon translation. In all of the accounts
    from Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery they talk about using the Urim and Thummim;
    anytime they clarify it's to specify that it was the Nephite Interpreters. As I
    will show, it's not completely unreasonable to think that Urim and Thummim could
    also refer to the Seer Stone; I find it an unconvincing argument to then presume
    that the Seer Stone was used in the translation, but that is beside the point.
    Between Joseph and Oliver's accounts, and the repeated prophecies in the Book of
    Mormon about how the Nephite Interpreters would be used in the interpretation of
    the Book of Mormon, I find it very easy to believe that anyone (myself included)
    that believes the Nephite Interpreters were exclusively used in the translation
    are (if the Seer Stone narrative is correct) understandably mistaken rather than
    deceptive. The current church leadership has no motive to continue to hide any
    records that they are allegedly hiding where Joseph Smith talks about using the
    Seer Stone to translate. Not to mention, by the time the Seer Stone left the
    church's collective consciousness (cerca 1950), the church leaders would have
    had a heck of time rounding up all copies of said documents. To me it makes more
    sense that Joseph and Oliver, for whatever reason, just didn't leave behind any
    solid, conclusive evidence of the Seer Stone being used in the translation.

[^motive]:
    Why would they do that? Supposing the church was true. Supposing that
    both the Nephite Interpreters and the Seer Stone were available for them to use.
    If they were ashamed enough of using the Seer Stone to feel like the needed to
    lie about it, why use it in the first place? If the Seer Stone worked as a tool
    for translation, why be ashamed of it? If Moroni took away the Urim and Thummim
    after the 116 pages debacle, never gave it back, and only the Seer Stone was
    available why not say that the Lord had prepared a way to translate even through
    the loss of the Nephite Interpreters. After all that's essentially the story
    behind the small plates. If the church isn't true, then everything they said
    about it was a lie, so whether they were lying about using the Urim and Thummim
    or lying about using the Seer Stone what difference does that make?

[^if-the-church-is-false]:
    Or I guess if the whole church is false and
    everything thing they said was a lie, but that's a lame option to explore.

This essay is not about the Seer Stone/Nephite Interpreters debate. I still
believe that the Nephite Interpreters were exclusively used in the translation
of the Book of Mormon, but I will concede that there is room for debate.
Recently I have found a couple historical documents that I don't know how they
fit into my understating of the historical events and they seem to support the
SITH narrative[^pilgrim] [^gazelem] [^martin-harris]. Some of them I was able to
explain away[^explain-away], but there are still some that I don't know how to
make fit. However there are a lot of questions I have about the translation
process that are much better answered (IMHO) with the Nephite Interpreters
exclusive model and so that's the one I currently subscribe to. I am enthralled
by the debate and inevitably I will write more about it. But today is not that
day![^not-that-day]

[^pilgrim]:
    Emma Smith wrote a letter to Emma Pilgrim talking about how the Urim
    and Thummim was used at first to translate, and then implies that the Seer Stone
    was used to translate the rest. James Lucas and Jonathan Neville point out that
    it's only an implication and we can only assume that's what she's talking about,
    but I would have to say it seems like a fair assumption. Here, you read it and
    tell me what you think.
    "Now the first that my husband translated, was translated by the use of the Urim
    and Thummim, and that was the part that Martin Harris lost, after that he used a
    small stone, not exactly, black, but rather a dark color. I can not tell whether
    that account in the Times and Seasons is correct or not because some one stole
    all my books and I have none to refer to at present, if I can find one that has
    the account I will tell you what is true and what is not."
    That's it. That's all we get. My understanding is that there is no more context
    available on either side of that quote. It's just that quote.

[^gazelem]:
    Gerrit Dirkmaat and Micheal Mackay put forth in Let's Talk About the
    Translation of the Book of Mormon that the Seer Stone was also prophesied about
    in the Book of Mormon and is even given a name Gazelem. The evidence for this
    comes from a story that someone allegedly heard from Wilford Woodruff and he
    allegedly heard it from Joseph Smith and it tells the story of Joseph Smith
    finding his Seer Stone and calling it Gazelem. Gazelem is ambiguously referred
    to the book of Alma related in some form to the translation of the Jaradite
    record. Above all else the thing that convinces me the most of the Nephite
    Interpreters exclusive model is that, as far as I interpret the scriptures, it
    seems like the Nephite Interpreters were the instrument that was prepared
    specifically for the translation of the Book of Mormon so it doesn't make sense
    that if Joseph had that specifically prepared instrument why he would use
    something else. But if there was a prophecy about the Seer Stone, then I could
    get behind it. I have a hard time interpreting the scripture in Alma in a way to
    fit Dirkmaat and Mackay's theory, but it's worth looking into more.

[^martin-harris]:
    The story from Martin Harris I don't feel like I have a great
    answer to. Is it a bit odd that he stuck to Urim and Thummim in all his accounts
    except this one? Yes. Is it a bit odd that it was published after his death?
    Yes. Is it possible that Edward Stevenson (who was the one that recorded the
    story and was on a mission to form connections with the remaining of the Three
    Witnesses, including David Whitmer) conflated something that Martin Harris said
    with something that David Whitmer said? Yes. But I don't know that I find all of
    those completely convincing answers.

[^explain-away]:
    The abridged version: Assuming that the Nephite Interpreters
    where exclusively used (I'll conceded that that's not a good place to start,
    what with confirmation bias and all that, but bear with me), then by necessity
    there would have to be some sort of way to conceal the Nephite Interpreters from
    the scribe, so Emma and Martin would only be able to assume what going on there.
    Zenas Gurley Jr stated that Joseph "frequently exhibited [the Seer Stone]" to
    help "assuage their [any of Joseph followers'] awful curiosity; but the Urim and
    Thummim never, unless possibly to Oliver Cowdery." Jonathan Neville's theory is
    that Joseph, especially in light of the harsh reprimand from the Lord about the
    116 pages, was very determined to strictly follow the command to "not show them
    [the plates] to any person; neither the breastplate with the Urim and Thummim;
    only to those to whom [he] should be commanded to show them; if [he] did [he]
    should be destroyed." Many people in the Whitmer home where, according to the
    theory, filled with the awful curiosity, and Joseph in an effort to get them off
    his back, so to say, gave a demonstration of _essentially_ how the translation
    took place. It is from this event that Elizabeth Ann Whitmer Cowdery, David
    Whitmer, Emma Smith and maybe even Martin Harris, draw in their accounts. The
    accounts were embellished as many stories are with the passage of time to
    include larger and larger portions of the translation until David felt like he
    could say that he was "an eye-witness to the translation of the greater part of
    the Book of Mormon" (which can't possibly be true, even if he sat in on every
    session that Joseph and Oliver had in the Whitmer home, that would only account
    for, according to my understanding, 1 Nephi through Words of Mormon), or
    Elizabeth Cowdery saying that she "often sat by and saw and heard them
    translate." The perceived need to embellish might have also been increased by
    the perceived threat of the then popular Spalding theory which was hard to
    refute if they admitted there was a curtain, but easy to refute if they relied
    on their extrapolated memory of the demonstration. Do I completely buy the
    demonstration model, I don't know... it answers a lot of the questions and puts
    a lot of people in a far more favorable light, then just saying that they were
    lying. On the other hand, I feel like it's based on only few historical accounts
    that are a little ambiguous but hey so are the other theories I am addressing in
    this essay...

[^not-that-day]:
    That being said there is a good possibility that I will slip up
    and still throw some jabs at my opponents on the SITH side of the debate. The
    term SITH (which I got from A Man Who Can Translate) is itself a little jab that
    I find too humorous to not throw in there. And when I say opponents I mean that
    in the most charitable sense of the word. I hold no malice towards anyone that
    espouses that view point, I see a lot of the appeal behind it and it does answer
    a handful of questions. But it doesn't speak to me, so until more evidence comes
    out that can convince me, I hope we are okay to agree to disagree.

Any talk about the debate is mostly to demonstrate that there is a debate, that
the answer is not as cut and dry as most would like, and that it ought to be
completely reasonable for anyone to make a mistake one way or another, in fact
I would go as far as to say that until more information comes to light on the
subject the best thing to do is to acknowledge that there is debate and refrain
from coming down on any one hard answer.[^no-real-answer]

[^no-real-answer]:
    Either that or accept my version of it. I do have to say that
    Jonathan Neville and James Lucas have much stronger feelings on the subject. In
    By Means of the Urim And Thummim they address the idea that SITH proponents
    espouse that we ought to talk about the Seer Stone to inoculate inquisitive
    minds against the accusations that critics of the church try to raise. They were
    as bold as to say that the SITH narrative is not an inoculation but is itself
    the poison. Not that we shouldn't talk about the Seer Stone at all, but rather
    if we are going to do so it ought not be at the expense of omitting the
    statements from Joseph and Oliver that seem to contradict the SITH narrative (
    i.e. any time that they specify that the Urim and Thummim they are referring to
    was the Nephite Interpreters).

I also recognize that it is a big and uncomfortable request to ask anyone to
live with historical ambiguities, especially for members of ours or any church.
Because we pride ourselves on having the Truth, and having access to modern day
prophets that should be able to clear up a lot of these answers. I would say
it's probably time for more of us (myself included) to acknowledge that while we
have the only priesthood authority, and we may have more full truth on many or
even most subjects, we don't have a monopoly on truth, and as the ninth article
of faith points out we believe that God will yet reveal many great and important
things. I don't know everything, you don't know everything, and maybe if we were
better about admitting that, we wouldn't put our selfs in a spot where there
seems to be so much contradiction. [^milk-before-meat]

[^milk-before-meat]:
    But also as Paul said in 1 Corinthians 3, milk before meat.
    I have heard people complain that a lot of this stuff isn't in the missionary
    lessons. That's ridiculous. There is no need for any investigator, or indeed
    anyone to become experts in the translation of the Book of Mormon. The most
    important point is that Joseph translated the Nephite record by the power of God
    and not of man. It's a divine work that if true, points to the divine gifts of
    the prophet who translated it, and by extension the church he helped restore.
    This isn't anywhere close to Xenu levels of bait and switch that another church
    does (and even that feels understandable in the context of their religion
    (and frankly there are other more compelling reasons to not be a member of that
    church)). So I think we're fine.

## What is in the Gospel Topics Essay that contradicts what I learned growing up?

Not much.

There are some additional details that I hadn't heard before, like when
translating there would be a little bit of a back and forth with Joseph and the
scribe where the scribe would say "Written" and then they wouldn't proceed until
Joseph made sure they had written it down correctly. But I think we can agree
that details like that seem to only add to the story, not contradict it, so I'm
happy to leave those alone for right now.

Technically, them referring to the Hill Cumorah as just "the hill" is a revision
but it's a fairly benign (albeit one that was likely agenda driven) decision
and addressing that is beyond the scope of this essay. [^geography]

[^geography]:
    If they had said "Well it wasn't really the Hill Cumorah, it's the
    hill called Cumorah by the people of Joseph Smith's time, but Moroni never
    called it Cumorah," Then I would say we would need to talk about it in this
    essay. But for now we will leave it for a geography discussions. I am
    anticipating that there is going to be A LOT of discussion of geography on this
    blog! Get pumped!

So that just leaves the SITH claims. [^and-lack-of-nephite-interpreters]

[^and-lack-of-nephite-interpreters]:
    Jonathan Neville complains a lot about how
    the Gospel Topics Essay lacks quotes from Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery that
    support the Nephite Interpreters exclusive model. I didn't notice that without
    him pointing it out. I saw the essay more as a answer to SITH claims so it made
    sense that it would mostly address SITH claims. So I don't see it as big a deal
    as Neville does, I will concede that there could be a risk of a SITH exclusive
    narrative being adopted, which I think would be truly tragic. I could live with
    a compromise theory where the Seer Stone was used for convenience, whatever that
    means, but frankly even going as far as saying the Urim and Thummim was used for
    the lost 116 pages and Seer Stone was used for the rest makes me feel
    uncomfortable. If we got to the point (without having additional compelling
    evidence) where the pendulum has swung the other way and we only talk about the
    Seer Stone I would see that as a major problem.

The SITH claims are not what I grew up with. I think I first heard about it
around the time that the church published the Gospel Topics Essays. So I guess
this could potentially qualify as history that the church leaders don't want to
you hear.

I think to figure out if it is or not we just need to answer these questions:

-   Can the church be true if the Seer Stone claims are true?
-   Why haven't we heard about the Seer Stone claims until just now?
    -   Are the Seer Stone claims true?
    -   Were church leaders lying about the Seer Stone claims
        -   Can the church be true if church leaders where lying about the Seer
            Stone claims?
-   What about the shifting narrative around the Seer Stone?
    -   Can the church be true if the Seer Stone claims are false and they are
        adopting the Seer Stone claims?
    -   Can the church be true if the church leaders have changed their story
        about the Seer Stone claims?

## Can the church be true if the Seer Stone claims are true?

Yes, of course. I have no idea, but I have to imagine the bulk of the problem
revolves around the fact that the predominant narrative has changed in recent
years, and not actually that the use of a Seer Stone is a deal breaker. Granted
it's a little weird that the Seer Stone is a folk magic thing but there seems to
be a lot of evidence of God working in ways that people will
understand[^understand] even if looks like superstition or folk magic to us.

[^understand]:
    Numbers 22, God speaks to Balak though his donkey. 1 Samuel 28
    The spirit of Samuel appears to Saul while Saul is talking to the Witch of
    Endor. 1 Nephi 3:11, Joshua 18:6-10, Acts 1:23-26 and more where they cast lots,
    Just to name a few.

> Behold, I am God and have spoken it; these commandments are of me, and were
> given unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language,
> that they might come to understanding.
>
> <cite>D&C 1:24</cite>

If God felt like Joseph Smith would understand revelations best if they were
given through a Seer Stone then who am I to say that the Seer Stone lessens the
divinity of the church? It's weird, it's different than what most of us were
taught, but I would say it's not without precedence.

## Why haven't we heard about the SITH claims until now

### Are the SITH claims true?

Maybe not. [^part-one]

[^part-one]:
    See part one of this series:
    https://www.bendemann.com/2023/07/book-of-mormon-translation.html

### But if they are true why haven't we heard about it

Saints Unscripted recently publish a video[^seer-stone-cover-up] detailing when
ideas about the Seer Stone where popular and when they were overlooked. It's
really great; I highly recommend checking it out.

[^seer-stone-cover-up]:
    Saint Unscripted: Did the Church hide the truth about
    Joseph Smith’s seer stone? | Ep. 201 https://youtu.be/JAMv7z6ubXk

They do a better job of explaining this than me, but the gist is that the
sources that talk about the Seer Stone generally fall into one of two camps.
Sources that are:

1. Relatively contemporary to the translation but come from antagonistic authors
   or
1. Dated decades[^decades] after the church moved to Utah and were from people
   that at the time had complicated relationships to the Salt Lake based branch of
   the church. [^complicated-relationships] [^not-grounds-for-dismissal]
   [^better-grounds-for-dismissal]

[^decades]:
    They are dated from the 1870's and 1880's so it's only two or three
    decades after the first pioneers hit Utah in 1847, but still, it's technically
    decades.

[^complicated-relationships]:
    The main sources for the SITH narrative are: Just
    about everything that David Whitmer ever said about the translation process, two
    sources from Emma, and one from Martin Harris. At the time the sources were
    given David Whitmer had left the church and he never did come back, Emma had
    joined the Reorganized church with her son Joseph Smith III, and Martin Harris
    has left the church and was on his way to Utah to reunite with the church at the
    time that his account was recorded.

[^not-grounds-for-dismissal]:
    Which by itself may not be reason to dismiss them,
    rather, I see it as reason to be understandable if the Salt Lake based church
    didn't wholeheartedly accept their stories and change up what was already 40+
    years of tradition saying that the Book of Mormon was translated by means of the
    Urim and Thummim. That is to say it may cause people to dismiss it (and I
    sympathize a lot with those feelings), even if it is not the "appropriate"
    response in the current historical paradigm.

[^better-grounds-for-dismissal]:
    For better grounds to dismiss them, if you are
    interested, I would refer you to By Means of the Urim & Thummim, or this Gospel
    Tangents interview: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NMSHsNs0IeQ or A Man Who Can
    Translate. Long story short, if you accept the Nephite Interpreters exclusive
    model, then because of God's commandment to not show the plates or the Nephite
    Interpreters to anyone there are only two first hand witnesses to the
    translation: Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. Everyone else, regardless of how
    well intentioned they are, or how knowledgeable they are, are second hand
    accounts at best and are prone to mistakes, inferences, and assumptions that
    might affect how they interpret and describe the events.

The result is that some early church leaders, like Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo
Snow, or BH Roberts talked about the possible use of the Seer Stone in the
translation (and I get the impression that they were citing the sources from
camp two), but by the time the 1950s rolled around there wasn't much more being
produced on the subject.

Meanwhile, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery never talked about using the Seer
Stone to translate the Book of Mormon; they only talked about using the Urim and
Thummim[^fly-in-ointment], which seems to give good reason to support a Nephite
Interpreters exclusive model.

[^fly-in-ointment]:
    One small fly in the ointment is that they occasionally
    talked about the spectacles or Nephite Interpreters or the Urim and Thummim that
    was found with the plates, but never the Seer Stone... but lets just disregard
    that for right now.

So it seems understandable that the Seer Stone was not in the church's lexicon
or tradition, because it started out that way, and perhaps wasn't introduced
until the 1870's, so maybe it never caught on.

It's a little more complicated that this, again check out the Saint Unscripted
video[^seer-stone-cover-up] for better coverage, but basically the tradition of
using the Urim and Thummim verbiage stuck, for various reasons the friendly
sources weren't considered, until recently there has been a bit of a paradigm
shift in how historical documents are assessed. As a result the sources that
talk about the Seer Stone were given new life and bingo bango bongo, the SITH
narrative was born again in our time!

### Were church leaders lying about the Seer Stone?

I think it makes a lot more sense that there was, and still is, a lot of
confusion regarding the issue. So I would firmly say no. Unless the current
church leaders are still hiding a bunch of documents where Joseph Smith talks
about using the Seer Stone in the Book of Mormon translation[^why-would-they],
then I think we can firmly peg any lying on Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery
about the Seer Stone.

[^why-would-they]:
    But why would they? The SITH narrative seems to be the
    mainstream narrative, at least among the church scholars. And it's in the Gospel
    Topics Essay. I would understand hiding if they were still trying to say the
    Seer Stone was not used, but now they are saying that it was. More documents
    citing that claim would help them establish the SITH narrative. It doesn't make
    sense to me that they would do that.

So lets look at that a bit more.

#### Were Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery lying about the Seer Stone?

An easy yes or no question

-   No
    -   They only used the Nephite Interpreters so there was no reason to talk
        about the Seer Stone
    -   Urim and Thummim refers to both the Nephite Interpreters and the Seer
        Stone
-   Yes
    -   They just didn't feel like it was worth talking about the Seer Stone
        -   It was a given
        -   It played a trivial role (maybe just for convenience) or
    -   They were embarrassed by it

But in all of those cases the church could still be true.

The Gospel Topics Essay proposes that the answer is No, because Urim and Thummim
refers to both the Nephite Interpreters and the Seer Stone, so I will be
focusing on that.[^a-given] [^other-answers] [^embarrassed]

[^a-given]:
    Maybe it wasn't worth mentioning because it was a given? Joseph
    loved his Seer Stone so much that to assume he didn't use it to translate would
    be like assuming that he didn't need to breath while they were translating.

[^other-answers]:
    Or imagine if the Urim and Thummim was the chief instrument,
    but for convenience he would occasionally use the the Seer Stone. Maybe the Seer
    Stone was just not worth mentioning because it was used only infrequently. This
    kind of flies in the face of David and Emma's statements that Joseph used the
    Urim and Thummim for the lost 116 pages and the Seer Stone for the text of the
    Book of Mormon as we have it now, but it would match up with Martin's statement
    made about the Seer Stone being used for convenience.

[^embarrassed]:
    But like why? There are a lot of things that Joseph Smith wasn't
    embarrassed by. Why this one?

##### Urim and Thummim Refers to both the Nephite Interpreters and the Seer Stone

This theory states that, unless they specify, whenever Joseph Smith or Oliver
Cowdery talk about the Urim and Thummim they may be referring to either the
Nephite Interpreters or the Seer Stone; the term Urim and Thummim supposedly was
used to mean any sort of stone based instrument used to receive revelation. So
when they say Urim and Thummim they could be referring to lots of different
things and the detail of which stone was used when was lost to the fog of
history.

Does that make sense?

Yeah kind of.

The only sources I have heard to support that the Seer Stone was referred to as
the Urim and Thummim are two events both of which involve Wilford Woodruff.

One is sited in the Gospel Topics Essay as the source proving the term Urim and
Thummim was used to refer to the Seer Stone. The context is Joseph is showing
the Quorum of the twelve something and Wilford Woodruff goes home and records in
his journal something to the effect of "Today I have seen the Urim and Thummim."
I believe at this point Joseph had given the Nephite Interpreters back to Moroni
for safe keeping. So whatever Wilford Woodruff saw it probably wasn't the
Nephite Interpreters that are commonly referred to by us as the Urim and
Thummim, so presumably it was Joseph's Seer Stone[^but-which-rock-really].

[^but-which-rock-really]:
    Though my understanding was that at that point he had
    given his chocolate colored seer stone to Oliver. Maybe he had another one?
    Maybe Moroni gave Joseph the Nephite Interpreters to show the twelve during the
    presentation. Maybe Joseph borrowed the Seer Stone from Oliver? Maybe I have my
    facts mixed up? Long story short I don't know that story is evidence enough to
    prove that Wilford Woodruff called the Seer Stone a Urim and Thummim much less
    evidence that other early church leaders did as well, but it's interesting

The other I found in Doctrines of Salvation volume III. In this case Joseph
Fielding Smith is telling the story about when Wilford Woodruff was dedicating
the Manti Temple and had the Seer Stone put out on the alter of the temple.
Apparently it was recorded that the Urim and Thummim was at the temple
dedication. Fast forward to Joseph Fielding Smith's time, and there were enough
people, who thought that Urim and Thummim only referred to the Nephite
Interpreters and that thought that the Nephite Interpreters were at the Manti
temple dedication, that Joseph Fielding Smith had to debunk it and say that it
was the Seer Stone that was present[^bh-roberts].

[^bh-roberts]:
    I found it interesting to note that Joseph Fielding Smith cites
    BH Robert's Comprehensive History of the Church for that story, and you may
    recognize that name as one of the few early church leaders that talked about the
    Seer Stone. I don't know if that is significant. Maybe just that he was a
    prolific early historian? But maybe his pro Seer Stone slant might affect how he
    interprets the Manti Temple story?

It feels reasonable to conclude that at least Wilford Woodruff used the term
Urim and Thummim to refer to both the Nephite Interpreters and the Seer Stone so
it seems plausible that other early church leaders would have as well.

Also consider the Urim and Thummim referred to in the bible[^biblical-u&t] that
the Israelite high priest wore as part of the breastplate of
judgment[^interestingly]. That is clearly a different device than the Nephite
Interpreters. That's at least two sets of stones that the early church leaders
would have referred to as Urim and Thummim.

[^biblical-u&t]: Exodus 28:30, Leviticus 8:8, Numbers 27:21, Deuteronomy 33:8
[^interestingly]:
    It stands to reason that Lehi and his family knew about the
    Israelite Urim and Thummim, if not from tradition then surly from the brass
    plates which contained the Books of Moses and therefore a reference to the
    Israelite Urim and Thummim. So it's interesting to note that the Nephites may
    have decided to go with the term "interpreters" not because they didn't know
    about the phrase Urim and Thummim but for some other reason. Maybe they saw an
    important distinction between the interpreters and the Urim and Thummim. Perhaps
    as good law of Moses followers, and as part of building a temple after the
    manner of Solomon, they had their own Urim and Thummim to go with their own
    breastplate of judgment and they wouldn't have thought to conflate the two.
    After all one marks the position of High Priest while the other constitutes the
    higher calling of Seer.

In Doctrine and Covenants 130 we get three more references to things that are
not the Nephite Interpreters but are referred as a Urim and Thummim[^d&c130],
namely "the place where God resides", "this earth, in its sanctified and
immortal stated" and a "white stone mentioned in Revelation 2:17"

[^d&c130]:
    I didn't count this one in the list of sources because it doesn't
    refer to the Seer Stone as a Urim and Thummim and because it says **a** Urim and
    Thummim instead of **the** Urim and Thummim. In Joseph and Oliver's account of
    the translation we see **the** Urim and Thummim and in Wilford Woodruffs account
    we see **the** Urim and Thummim. My thought is if we were talking about
    something else, suns for example, I would expect that if were talking about
    different planets and their stars we might refer to how that planet has **a**
    sun. If we were in a conversation specifically about that planet, I could see us
    using the term **the** sun to refer to that planet's sun. But if there is no
    additional context then I am going to assume that anytime we are talking about
    **the** sun it is referring to our sun. By that logic I would expect any
    reference to **the** Urim and Thummim to refer to the most commonly used stone
    or set of stones. So if the most common Urim and Thummim used in the Book of
    Mormon translation is the Nephite Interpreters (which seems like a fair
    assumption to me based on the number of times Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery
    specify that it was the Urim and Thummim found with the plates, or the
    spectacles, or the Nephite Interpreters etc) then I would expect **the** Urim
    and Thummim to refer to the Nephite Interpreters. I guess what I am looking for
    in these sources it evidence that the primacy of the article **the** was also
    afforded to other stones and not just the Nephite Interpreters. D&C 130 doesn't
    do that.

I feel pretty confident in saying that for early church leaders the Nephite
Interpreters were not the only thing that the term Urim and Thummim could be
applied to[^urim-and-thummim-not-seer-stone]. Does that mean that some of the
references to Urim and Thummim in Joseph Smith's and Oliver Cowdery's accounts
might refer to the Seer Stone. I don't think so, I find it a little difficult to
read it that way[^my-interpretation], but it's conceivable.

[^urim-and-thummim-not-seer-stone]:
    Also note that even if we can firmly
    establish that early church leaders referred to multiple different things as
    Urim and Thummim, that does not mean, necessarily, that the Seer Stone was ever
    referred to as a Urim and Thummim.

[^my-interpretation]:
    I just think that there are too many clarification that
    point to the Nephite Interpreters and not a single clarification that point to
    the Seer Stone. It could be true that Joseph Smith referred to his Seer Stone as
    a Urim and Thummim (a point I am still on the fence about), but that doesn't
    mean that it was used in the translation of Book of Mormon. In deed that might
    be the reason why anytime they specified which Urim and Thummim it was because
    the term Urim and Thummim could refer to his Seer Stone and they wanted to be
    clear that they were **not** talking about that Urim and Thummim but rather the
    Urim and Thummim that was found with the plates. On the other hand just because
    it's hard for me to read it that way doesn't mean it's impossible.

Critics of the "they used the term Urim and Thummim and Seer Stone
interchangeably" theory will point out that the Book of Mormon affirming sources
David Whitmer, Joseph Smith III, Emma Smith in a letter to Emma Pilgrim, and
Edward Stevenson (reporting what Martin Harris had told him) as well as the
critical ones (such as Mormonism Unveiled) all distinguish the Nephite
Interpreters and Seer Stone by calling them the Urim and Thummim and the Seer
Stone which possibly contradicts the idea that the term was used interchangeably
[^david-and-emma-didnt-use-urim-and-thummim-for-seer-stone].

[^david-and-emma-didnt-use-urim-and-thummim-for-seer-stone]:
    A source for this
    claim would be good. But the point is that it's because of these references
    drawing a distinction between the two that we have the idea that the Seer Stone
    was used at all. In their recent Gospel Tangents interview Jonathan Neville and
    James Lucas even point out that one of these people made a big deal about not
    referring to the Seer Stone as the Urim and Thummim.
    https://youtu.be/Kl4iVSX8EJA?si=5IoMXZ16Y9NfoFA3 That's the first part of the
    interview and it stretches from episode 798 to 802. I don't recall what part it
    was in. But the whole interview is great, check it out!

But it could be that it was only very early church leaders that used the term
Urim and Thummim to to mean both Nephite Interpreters and Seer Stone. Maybe by
the time the 1870's and 1880's rolled around maybe it was more common to
distinguish them by Urim and Thummim and Seer Stone. (except for at the Manti
Temple dedication in 1888 (or maybe Utah kept using one style and the eastern
branches changed to another style (or maybe the eastern branches had developed
some verbiage to distinguish themselves from the Salt Lake church or visa
versa)))

While I feel like the "Urim and Thummim refers to both the Nephite Interpreters
and the Seer Stone" theory feels like a cop out I don't think it's completely
meritless. And after all, just because it feels like a cop out doesn't mean it's
not true.

Assuming that Urim and Thummim = Seer Stone and Urim and Thummim = Nephite
Interpreters it's pretty easy to imagine a situation were confusion ensues. That
is especially easy to imagine if you have the story being filtered through the
lense of someone who feels a little more uncomfortable with folk
magic.[^compromise]

[^compromise]:
    Which I throw out there not because I believe that, but as a way
    of compromising. I could see a world where someone who feels embarrassed by the
    Joseph Smith's folk magic background, might be more willing to cling to the
    Nephite Interpreters exclusive model. If it's an understandable mistake to make
    because the evidence isn't so cut and dry then why not promote the theory you
    like? I would also like to point out that just because someone favors the theory
    because they would rather not acknowledge the folk magic association Joseph
    Smith has, does not mean the theory is wrong. It's just that that person would
    not have the best motives for adopting that theory. But there are reasons for
    accepting the Nephite Interpreters exclusive model, I'll remind you that I think
    that theory is correct, and I have no problem with Joseph Smith's folk magic
    background.

Why would Joseph and Oliver use the term Urim and Thummim for both the Nephite
Interpreters and the Seer Stone?

Gerrit J Dirkmaat and Michael Hubbard Mackay suggest in "Let's Talk About the
Translation of The Book of Mormon" that the Urim and Thummim phraseology
developed as a short hand to circumvent jeering taunts from critics. They point
out that critics would make fun of the Nephite Interpreters by calling them
something to the effect of Jo's magic spectacles and of course the Seer Stone
would be mocked for it's relation to treasure seeking. So the early church
leaders started referring to these stones as Urim and Thummim perhaps out of
embarrassment but mostly out of a "let's not get caught up in that, we'll bypass
the taunting with some biblical terminology with more gravitas so we can move on
to the more important message of the Book of Mormon." [^keep-in-mind]

[^keep-in-mind]:
    Keep in mind that that could be the true origin of why they
    called the Nephite Interpreters the Urim and Thummim and it could still not
    apply to the Seer Stone.

Okay, that was a lot, so to recap, Did we answer the question at the top?

If the Seer Stone was used in translation, why did Joseph Smith and Oliver
Cowdery only talk about using the Urim and Thummim in the translation?

According to the Gospel Topics Essay it's because Urim and Thummim can refer to
both the Nephite Interpreters and the Seer Stone.

The implication is that everyone from the 1950 until today were confused, and
understandably so, but now that we have a better understanding of history it's
all cleared up. [^awkward]

[^awkward]:
    On the other hand, if the Nephite Interpreters exclusive model is
    correct then modern historians have actually made a relatively straight forward
    issue more confusing by introducing this idea that we have no idea what Urim and
    Thummim might actually refer to...

## What about the shifting narratives?

What about them?

### Can the church be true if the church leaders have changed their story?

Sure. It's not exactly a doctrine of salvation that we are talking about here.
And even if it was, don't we believe that the Lord teaches us line upon line?
Joseph didn't learn everything overnight and he didn't teach it to the early
church overnight. We like learning and as we learn more we have to put away
things that we learn are wrong or incomplete and embrace what we have learned to
be true.

### Can the church be true if the Seer Stone claims are false and they are adopting the Seer Stone claims?

Of course. You remember back when Mark Hoffman made all of those forgeries,
right? And when the church made their official statement on them Gordon B.
Hinckley said,

> At this point we accept the judgment of the examiner that there is no
> indication that it is a forgery. This does not preclude the possibility that
> it may have been forged at a time when the Church had many enemies.
> [^salamander-letter]

[^salamander-letter]:
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salamander_letter It's just
    wikipedia... but that's good enough for the purposes of the quote

He was holding out hope for more information to come, but it seemed like he was
ready to accept the result of a trusted examiner when it came to this matter.
I think that's okay. Trust the best information you have until more information
comes to light. That examiner ended up being wrong, not because of anything
malicious on his end, but because Mark Hoffman was a skilled conman and forger.
And ultimately God worked though his mysterious ways to bring to light Mark
Hoffman's dark deeds and now we all know the truth.

I am holding out hope for the day that we find some new evidence that proves
that it was just the Nephite Interpreters. But I don't fault the church leaders
for following the advice of trusted historians that say that the Seer Stone was
likely used in translation. And since it's not a doctrine of salvation, I don't
expect the prophet to receive any revelation on the matter anytime soon. My
opinion is that any church leader or historian that is not Joseph Smith or
Oliver Cowdery[^why-oliver] is simply expressing an opinion on the matter. And I
would hope that that opinion is well researched and based off sources they
trust. And I accept that, because of different criteria or biases, they have
chosen different conclusions than I have. That's fine. The matter of the Seer
Stone vs the Nephite Interpreters feels very trivial (in the sense of trivia) to
me. Not a matter of doctrinal importance.

So yeah, the church can be true even if they hold a none doctrinally significant
view point that is possibly incorrect. And anyways by the law of line upon line,
they could even hold a incorrect doctrinally significant view point and as long
as they are striving to accept the guidance of the Lord as he is trying to teach
them the next line, I have no problem with the church changing it's official
stance on anything as long as it is in a effort to better align the church with
the will of God.

### Can we trust the church leaders if they are prone to such mistakes?

Yeah, I think as far as mortal men go, you could do a lot worse. Part of the
mortal experience is dealing with imperfect people. And church leaders are some
of those people. I don't think the Lord will permit the leaders to lead the
church too far astray on important issues. So I feel like on the topics that
matter, the church leaders will be less prone to mistakes and better at
receiving revelation than at least the average person. I believe that they are
better than most people.

## Conclusion

I find no compelling evidence to suggest that there is a nefarious plot to hide
the possible reality of the use of the Seer Stone in the translation of the Book
of Mormon. It just doesn't make any sense. On the one hand it is clear that the
historical accounts make it unclear (Those closest said and reaffirmed Urim and
Thummim/Nephite Interpreters, while many observers declared that it was the Urim
and Thummim _and_ the Seer Stone). On the other hand, those with opportunity to
lie had no motive and those with motive had no opportunity. And on a third hand
this is the church that believes that Kolob is the governing star, that the
Garden of Eden is in Missouri, and has members that even now are trying to
convince themselves the tapir could be translated as horse and that cureloms are
wooly mammoths, so I think we could manage incorporating the use of Seer Stones
in our church, as made evident by the existence of the theory that early church
history downplayed the folk magic past by christening the Seer Stones as a Urim
and Thummim. I am convinced that if we needed to incorporate Seer Stones but
really had a hard time swallowing the folk magic bit, that's exactly the kind of
story we would come up with to help it go down easier.

Are church leaders hiding an uncomfortable past? Not on this one.

Next up I'll be responding to the scholarly approach to this Gospel Topics
Essay, _The "Book of Mormon Translation" Essay in Historical Context_ by
John-Charles Duffy. I liked his essay a lot, he hardly touches on the Seer Stone
at all and instead mostly focuses on what is essentially Royal Skousen's
translation paradigm of loose/tight/iron-clad control of the translation. It's
very fascinating and I'm excited to review it!
