---
title: "Book of Mormon and DNA Studies Part I"
date: "2023-08-30"
slug: "the-lds-gospel-topics-series/dna-and-the-book-of-mormon"
tags: ["church"]
---

Off the bat, I feel like this one doesn't really fit into the same theme of
answering the question, "Is the church hiding stuff?" So I'm going to approach
this topic a little differently. For part one, I'll try to go through what I
already know about this topic, my feelings, and my opinions on it before doing
further research.

In part two, I'll go over the Gospel Topics Essay and point out anything new I
learned from it. I've already looked at the essay a little bit, and I already
know there is a lot of new stuff for me in there, because I am not a
microbiologist. I did a semester of Biotech as a concurrent enrollment class in
high school, so I don't know nothing about DNA[^pcr], but I also don't know a
lot. Consequently, I don't know that I will have enough authority to say
if it holds water or not. I don't think I'll be talking about how I didn't grow
up hearing anything about the founder effect in Sunday School... that seems
silly to me, but we'll get more into that later.

[^pcr]:
    For example, I know this really jamming song about polymerase chain
    reaction (PCR) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x5yPkxCLads

And same as usual[^i-say] for part three; I'll read and respond to the response
in "The LDS Gospel Topics Essays: A Scholarly Approach" and see what they have
to say on the matter.

[^i-say]:
    I say this as if I have ever completed a part three on this blog...
    Yet, the Book of Mormon translation part 3 is still coming, I promise.

## Where Am I at Right Now?

I don't expect there to be any DNA evidence of the Book of Mormon in the same
way that I don't expect the scientific community to give up on the Big Bang in
favor of divine design.[^that-is-to-say]

[^that-is-to-say]:
    That is to say, I don't expect any mainstream scientist to
    ever come out and say "Hey, look, here's evidence that the Book of Mormon is
    real!" I would suspect such a scientist would be ridiculed and dismissed (and
    then transition to the following category). I would also expect any faithful
    scientist out there looking for DNA evidence of the Book of Mormon to be
    dismissed as a pseudoscientist. The foreword to Faith Crisis Volume 1: We Were
    Not Betrayed! by Hannah Stoddard, (the foreword is by Chauncey C. Riddle) put it
    pretty well. He discusses professional historians, but his observations
    certainly apply to professional scientists as well. He mentions that they must
    adhere to a specific metaphysical frame in all their research in order to be
    accepted by their peers, requiring that everything have a naturalistic
    explanation. No supernatural allowed. This idea has captured my attention, and I
    will certainly come back to it later; for now, it's just a footnote.

Similarly, I expect my church to talk about DNA evidence just like I expect them
to teach me about Physics or Computer Science[^church-taught-cs]. That is to
say, I don't expect them to do that.

[^church-taught-cs]:
    On the other hand, I did get a CS degree from BYU so maybe
    I did expect my church to teach me something about Computer Science üòÖÔ∏è

I am personally not too fussed about it. I don't see lack of DNA evidence as
proof that the events of the Book of Mormon didn't actually happen any more than
looking at pictures of quasars convinces me that the Big Bang happened.

I get the impression that the apparent lack of DNA evidence is a big deal for
some. I get it. We rely on DNA a lot for criminal cases and it sure seems pretty
flashy in movies. I know Rod Meldrum takes the DNA stuff pretty seriously, I've
heard him tell the story of the sister from his ward that was losing her
testimony over DNA issues, and his response wasn't "Boy she really needs to base
her testimony of the spirit instead of whatever she's doing." Instead his
response was, "Wow, I should really dig into DNA and try to understand it so I
can help people like her." I don't want to minimize the DNA concerns, and I'm
going to try and apply the same logic and compassion as I research this topic
[^lack-of-interest].

[^lack-of-interest]:
    But I will confess, I do not foresee myself being as
    consumed by this as I was about the Seer Stone. It's just not really calling to
    me, and I will certainly not dedicate as much time to is as has Rod Meldrum. So
    if you want just enough to help you keep your testimony, then you have come to
    the right place. If you want a deep dive, I highly recommend checking out the
    [Book of Mormon Evidence Conference](https://bookofmormonevidence.org/)!

So for starters, while I don't think that there needs to be DNA evidence for the
Book of Mormon for someone to believe it to be true, I do think it would be nice
to have a plausible explanation for why there is not yet any DNA
evidence, or if there is DNA evidence (as Rod Meldrum would suggest), why does
the scientific community at large not accept it?

Ultimately, I don't think this is a deal breaker either way, at least for me. If
there was DNA evidence for the Book of Mormon I would expect the skeptical
community to find a way to not believe it, and I would simultaneously encourage
fellow members to not base their testimonies on it[^do-study-though]. And I
would expect the same to hold in reverse if there was no DNA evidence. I would
encourage skeptics to not discount the Book of Mormon because they haven't yet
found evidence, and I would expect faithful people to still not base their
testimony (or throw it out) over a lack of evidence. Lack of evidence is not
proof of lack of existence.

[^do-study-though]:
    I think you should still study it even though
    I don't think you should base your testimony on it. I still go to the [Book of
    Mormon Evidence Conference](https://bookofmormonevidence.org/). I think it's
    great! But I go there to learn interesting little trivia; I go to church and
    read the scriptures to work on my testimony.

And besides, science is a liar... sometimes[^always-sunny]

[^always-sunny]:
    It's Always Sunny In Philadelphia | Season 8 Ep. 10: Mac
    Evolution https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GiJXALBX3KM
